.TH froggen 1 "2016 october 24"

.SH NAME
froggen \- A Generator for Frog datafiles
.SH SYNOPSYS
froggen [options]

froggen \-T tagged\-corpus -l additional\-lemmas -c config\-file

.SH DESCRIPTION
froggen will convert a datafile containing words, lemmas and POS\-tags into a
complete dataset to run Frog. Additional extra lemmas can be provided.

.SH OPTIONS

.BR \-b " <basename>"
.RS
Use this name as the base for all outputfiles that will be created.
.RE

.BR \-c " <configfile>"
.RS
Specify a configuration file in Frog style.

The parameters found here will be used in training of the lemmatizer and the
tagger.
.RE

.BR \-e " <encoding>"
.RS
assume the input files to be in the specified
.B encoding.
.B Froggen
will convert all data to UTF8, the encoding which
.B frog
assumes.
.RE

.BR \-l " <lemmas>"
.RS
provide additional lemmas, in the format:

word <WS> lemma <WS> POS\-tag

Where WS is whitespace like spaces or tab(s).

.RE

.BR \-t " <tokenizer>"
.RS
specify a rules file for an
.B ucto
tokenizer. It s added to the frog configuration
.B AND
.B froggen
will check if the input is compatible with the tokenizer.

(e.g. when an input contains an entry like:
.nf
foo-bars foo-bar PLURAL_NOUN
.fi
and the tokenizer would split 'foo-bars' into two word: 'foo' and 'bars', the
input, however correct, will lead to lemmatizer and tagger rules which will
never be used, given this tokenizer)
.RE

.BR \-T " <tagged corpus>"
.RS
This is the main input file for
.B froggen.
It should consist of tagged sentences in the format:

word <WS> lemma <WS> POS\-tag

Where WS is whitespace like spaces or tab(s).

Sentences must be separated by the symbol
.I <utt>
on a separate line.

example:
.nf
Zijn	zijn	WW(pv,tgw,mv)
dat	dat	VNW(aanw,pron,stan,vol,3o,ev)
standaardmaat	standaardmaat	N(soort,ev,basis,zijd,stan)
?	?	LET()
<utt>
Nou	Nou	BW()
je	je	VNW(pers,pron,nomin,red,2v,ev)
hebt	hebben	WW(pv,tgw,met-t)
ze	ze	VNW(pers,pron,stan,red,3,mv)
in	in	VZ(init)
rond	rond	ADJ(vrij,basis,zonder)
en	en	VG(neven)
vierkant	vierkant	ADJ(vrij,basis,zonder)
.	.	LET()
<utt>
.fi
.RE

.BR \-h
.RS
give some help
.RE

.BR \-O " <outputdir>"
.RS
send all output to 'outputdir' instead of the current directory.
This option is highly recommened while froggen will generated a bunch of files.
.RE

.BR \-V " or " \-\-version
.RS
show version info
.RE

.SH BUGS
likely

.SH AUTHORS
Ko van der Sloot K.vanderSloot@let.ru.nl

Antal van den Bosch Timbl@uvt.nl

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ucto (1) frog (1)
