.TH nergen 1 "2018 march 20"

.SH NAME
nergen \- A Generator for Frogs NER
.SH SYNOPSIS
nergen [options]

nergen -c config\-file -g gazeteer\-file -O output\-dir <tagged-corpus>

nergen -c config\-file -g gazeteer\-file -O output]-dir --bootstrap <corpus>

.SH DESCRIPTION
nergen will convert a datafile containing words and NER\-tags into a
complete dataset to run the Frog NER.

With the
.B --bootstrap
option an untagged corpus can be bootstrapped, using gazeteer information.

.SH OPTIONS

.BR \-c " <configfile>"
.RS
Specify a configuration file in Frog style. (required, except when
.B --bootstrap
is used.
The parameters found here will be used for POS tagging, to improve te accuracy
of Frog. This file also serves as a template to create a new Frog config
file with a [[NER]] data section.
.RE

.BR \-g " <gazeteer>"
.RS
Specify a gazeteer datafile.
.nf
The format of such a file is:
.nf
class1<tab>file\-name1
class2<tab>file\-name2

every 'file\-name' should give a list of entities for that class.

An entity can be a single word, or a sequence. Every entity should be on a
separate line.

Example, from the file geonames-nl.ner
Aa
Aabeek
Aadam Wihelmina
Aadam Wilhelmina Hotel
Aadorp
Aaftinkbrug

When this is refered in the gazeteer files as:
loc	geonames-nl.ner

then for instance 'het Aadam Wilhelmina Hotel in Aadorp' migth be tagged as:
het/O Aadam/B-loc Wilhelmina/I-loc Hotel/I-loc in/O Aadorp/B-loc

.RE

.BR <tagged\-corpus>
.RS
This is the main input file for
.B nergen.
It should consist of tagged sentences in the format:
.nf
word <WS> NER\-tag
.nf
Where WS is whitespace like spaces or tab(s).

Sentences must be separated by the symbol
.I <utt>
on a separate line. Or at least one empty line, example:
.nf
Is	O
dat	O
Jan	B-per
de	I-per
Bruin	I-per
?	O
<utt>
De	O
is	O
in	O
Noord	B-loc
Brabant	I-loc
.	O
<utt>
.fi
.RE

.BR \-\-override
.RS
When NER tags are present in the inputfile, they will be SOMETIMES be replaced
by tags derived from the gazeteers. The conditions are:

\- The tag to be replaced is a 'O' tag

\- The POS tag is either
.B SPEC
or
.B N

.RE


.BR \-O " <outputdir>"
.RS
send all output to 'outputdir' instead of the current directory.
This option is highly recommened while nergen will generated a bunch of files.
.RE

.BR \-\-bootstrap
.RS
When NER tags are present in the inputfile, they will be discarded and replaced
by tags derived from the gazeteers.
With this option, a new trainfile for nergen is created.
To use i, nergen has o be run again on this file.
.RE

.BR \-h
.RS
give some help
.RE

.BR \-V " or " \-\-version
.RS
show version info
.RE

.SH BUGS
likely

.SH AUTHORS
Ko van der Sloot K.vanderSloot@let.ru.nl

Antal van den Bosch Timbl@uvt.nl

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ucto (1) frog (1)
